Anja Cetti Andersen (born 25 September 1965) is an astronomer and astrophysicist from Hørsholm, Denmark.
She received her BSc in 1991, MSc in astronomy in 1995, and her PhD in 1999, from the University of Copenhagen. Her thesis was titled "Cosmic Dust and Late-Type Stars".  Her postdoctoral research was funded by the Carlsberg Foundation, firstly at the Department of Astronomy & Space Physics, Uppsala University, and then at the Astronomical Observatory at the University of Copenhagen.  After this she was funded by her home institution and received a Diploma in Higher Education Teaching and Teaching Practice from the Faculty of Sciences.[1]  Her interest in astronomy was kindled when she was in the seventh grade, after a visit to her school from Uffe Grae Jorgensen,[2]  a Danish astronomer, and with whom she now works in Copenhagen.  She has three children, Julie, Cecilie and Jakob.
Her work concentrates on cosmic dust, and its role "in relation to the formation of complex molecules, stars and planets."[3] She is currently an associate professor at the Niels Bohr Institute, and is part of the management team where she conducts research at the Dark Cosmology Center in Copenhagen.  She is a publisher of academic papers, has written several books, and is a lecturer, and also considered one of the best speakers currently using public outreach techniques in order to raise the profile of science in the community. It is characteristic of Anja Andersen's research that she works at the intersection between physics, chemistry, geology and biology.  Her early research was involved with presolar grains from meteorites.  Working with Susanne Hofner, their research in 2003 showed that "correct micro-physical description of the dust is crucial for predicting the mass loss rates of AGB stars."  Her work with Hofner continued, leading to further developments in the understanding of the action of dust-driven wind, and she collaborated with researchers in Uppsala to study "how the optical properties of dust grains change" when they leave a star and move into inter-stellar regions.[4]  While she is researching the influence of cosmic dust on early planet formation, she is also working on models of why life on Earth is constructed of left hand twisted amino acids and right hand twisted sugars.[3]  There is a hint of the unconventional about Andersen in her interdisciplinary approach to her work, and indeed her method of working.  She states that she feels herself to be an "atypical astronomer, because I am in the laboratory much of the times studying the chemical composition of meteorites in order to use that knowledge for theoretical models of how solar systems can be formed".[5]
She is also an author, working with fellow Dane Peter Clausen to produce works about astronomy which are aimed at the general public.[6]  Whilst she is recognized as one of the foremost researchers in her fields, she is also a scientist who believes that "it is important to tell the world and young people in particular about exciting new research".[5]  She has written books for children, explaining astronomy to a young audience, as well as "Stjernsov og Galakser" (Starduast and Galaxies), and most recently "Livet er et Mirakel" (Life is a Miracle), with theologist Anna Mejlhede.  Many of her awards have been for her teaching ability, and "public outreach", her work in raising the profile of science.  She is also an advocate of improving the numbers of women currently in respected positions within science academia, stating at the Djof Conference on Gender Equality in 2007 "I'd rather have a top post, because I'm a woman, and show what I can do, than sit outside the door and never get the chance. For me it does not matter whether you use a whip or a carrot, we just get some action."[7]  She explains her work about dark energy and dark matter, cosmic dust and many other matters in astronomy in the following educational video: "Interview with Anja Cetti Andersen - Author, Professor, and Researcher - Copenhagen University".[8][9]  In addition, she has a minor planet named after her, 8820 Anjandersen, alternate designation  1985 VG = 1961 CE1 = 1978 YO1 = 1992 SG24 = 1994 CS1 [10]
Learned Societies
Network Groups
