Anna Nagurney is a Ukrainian-American mathematician, economist, educator and author in the field of Operations Management. Nagurney is the Eugene M. Isenberg Chair in Integrative Studies in the Isenberg School of Management at the University of Massachusetts Amherst in Amherst, Massachusetts.[1] Previously, she held the John F. Smith Memorial Professorship of Operations Management at the Isenberg School of Management from 1998 to 2021.
She received a BS in Applied Mathematics, an AB in Russian Language and Literature, an ScM in Applied Mathematics, and a PhD in Applied Mathematics, all from Brown University in Providence, Rhode Island. Nagurney's Doctoral Advisor at Brown University was Stella Dafermos. Nagurney has contributed to many different areas of operations research with a focus on network systems from congested urban transportation networks to complex supply chains with applications to food, healthcare, disaster relief, among others. She is the author/co-author of over 220 refereed journal articles and 50 book chapters as well as 15 books. She has given keynote talks in many countries, including the US, UK, Colombia, Sweden, France, Germany, Ukraine, Italy, New Zealand, Canada, among others. She has supervised the doctoral dissertations of 23 PhDs. She has held visiting faculty appointments at MIT, at the Royal Institute of Technology (KTH) in Sweden, at SOWI at the University of Innsbruck, Austria, at the School of Business, Economics and Law at the University of Gothenburg in Sweden, and was a visiting fellow at All Souls College at Oxford University in the UK during the Trinity term in 2016.
She delivered the Omega Rho Distinguished Lecture, Networks to save the world: OR in Action, at the 2018 INFORMS Annual Meeting. [2] She delivered the IFORS Distinguished Lecture, Human migration networks: How Operations Research can assist with refugees and supply chain labor shortages, at CLAIO 2022, Buenos Aires, Argentina, December 2022. [3] [4]
She is also a member of the international academic board and the co-chair of the board of directors of the Kyiv School of Economics, Kyiv Ukraine[5]
She is one of the 44 women featured in the book, STEM Gems, by Stephanie Espy. [6]
Her Google Scholar h-index is 71. [7]
